halt(8) -- halt, poweroff, reboot - Halt, power-off or reboot the machine
=========================================================================

## SYNOPSIS

`halt` [<options>]

`poweroff` [<options>]

`reboot` [<options>]

## DESCRIPTION

`halt`, `poweroff`, `reboot` may be used to halt, power-off, or reboot the machine.
All three commands take the same options.

Care is taken to first stop all containers using `osctl shutdown`. As long as
`osctl shutdown` is running, it is possible to abort the operation using `Ctrl+C`,
i.e. sending `SIGINT` signal. See osctl(8) for more information.

## HALT REASON
Unless option `-m`, `--message` is provided, `$EDITOR` is opened for the user
to write one. The reason is then written to syslog and sent to logged-in container
users as a wall message.

The default reason opened in `$EDITOR` can be extended by templates placed
in directory `/etc/runit/halt.reason.d`. Non-executable text files are read
and appended, executable files are run with the following envinronment variables:

  * `HALT_ACTION`: poweroff/reboot
  * `HALT_REASON_FILE`: path to the file where the reason should be written

`$EDITOR` is opened after all templates have been appended or run. Halt reason
templates can be configured using vpsAdminOS option `runit.halt.reasonTemplates`,
see configuration.nix(5).

## OPTIONS

The following options are understood:

  * `-h`, `--help`:
    Print a short help text and exit.

  * `-f`, `--force`:
    Forcefully power-off/reboot the system without asking for confirmation.

  * `-r`, `--reboot`:
    Reboot the machine, regardless of which one of the three commands is invoked.

  * `-p`, `--poweroff`:
    Power-off the machine, regardless of which one of the three commands is invoked.

  * `-w`, `--[no-]wall`:
    Send message to logged-in container users. Enabled by default.

  * `-m`, `--message` *MSG*:
    Message sent to logged-in container users.

## BUGS

Report bugs to https://github.com/vpsfreecz/vpsadminos/issues.

## ABOUT

`halt` is a part of [vpsAdminOS](https://github.com/vpsfreecz/vpsadminos).
