# Container send/receive
*osctld* has support for moving and cloning containers between different
vpsAdminOS nodes with SSH used as a transport channel. Each vpsAdminOS node has
a system user called `osctl-ct-receive`. The source node is connecting to the
`osctl-ct-receive` user on the destination node. Authentication is based on
public/private keys.

## Setup
On the source node, a public/private key pair is needed. It can be generated by
`osctl send key gen`, or the keys can be manually installed to paths given
by `osctl send key path public` and `osctl send key path private`.

```shell
source-node $ osctl send key gen -t ecdsa

source-node $ osctl send key path public
/tank/conf/send-receive/key.pub

source-node $ cat /tank/conf/send-receive/key.pub
ecdsa-sha2-nistp521 AAAAE2VjZHNhLXNoYT... root@source-node
```

Through another communication channel, picked at your discretion, the public key
of the source node must be transfered to the destination node and authorized to
send containers to that node. Once transfered, the key can be authorized
using `osctl receive authorized-keys add`, the key is entered on a single line
to the standard input:

```shell
destination-node $ osctl receive authorized-keys add
ecdsa-sha2-nistp521 AAAAE2VjZHNhLXNoYT... root@source-node
```

Now the source node is authorized to send containers to the destination node.
You can verify that by running SSH directly:

```shell
source-node $ ssh -T -i `osctl send key path private` -l osctl-ct-receive destination-node
Usage:
  receive skel [pool]
  receive base [pool:]<id> <dataset> [snapshot]
  receive incremental [pool:]<id> <dataset> [snapshot]
  receive transfer [pool:]<id> [start]
  receive cancel [pool:]<id>
```

As you can see, the SSH connection is limited to several commands that are
handled by *osctld*. The meaning of those commands will become clearer once you
read the section below, but it's enough to know the shell is restricted for
container send/receive only.

## Moving containers
The container move itself consists of several steps:

 - `osctl ct send config` is used to prepare environment on the destination
   node and copy configuration
 - `osctl ct send rootfs` sends over the container's rootfs
 - `osctl ct send sync` optionally synchronizes the source and destination rootfs
 - `osctl ct send state` stops the container on the source node, performs
   another rootfs sync and finally starts the container on the destination node
 - `osctl ct send cleanup` is used to remove the container from the source
   node

Up until `osctl ct send state`, the send can be cancelled using
`osctl ct send cancel`, which resets the container's send state on the
source node and removes the partially transfered container from the destination
node.

`osctl ct send` will perform all necessary steps in succession.
Use this when you don't care when is a particular send step run. Otherwise,
you can choose when to run specific send steps to optimize for minimum
downtime at reasonable hours. Consider the following example:

```shell
# 1) Prepare the send
source-node $ osctl ct send config myct01 destination-node

# 2) Make an initial copy the container's rootfs, this will be the most
#    time-consuming operation
source-node $ osctl ct send rootfs myct01

# 3) Regularly synchronize rootfs while waiting for optimal time to transfer the
#    container, which will cause a downtime depending on how much data has changed
#    since `osctl ct send rootfs` or the last `osctl ct send sync`
source-node $ osctl ct send sync myct01

# 4) When the downtime will be least unwelcome, finally transfer the container
source-node $ osctl ct send state myct01

# 5) Cleanup is executed only on the source node, the destination node is already
#    finished
source-node $ osctl ct send cleanup myct01
```

## Cloning containers
`osctl ct send` by defaults moves containers from one node to another, but it
can be used to clone containers to remote nodes as well. Cloning works in the
same way as moving, except that `osctl ct send state` will not keep the source
container down and `osctl ct send cleanup` will not remove it.

Use option `--clone` to make a clone instead of moving the container:

```shell
osctl ct send --clone myct01 destination-node
# or in steps
osctl ct send config myct01 destination-node
osctl ct send rootfs myct01
osctl ct send state --clone myct01
osctl ct send cleanup myct01
```

There are several useful options when cloning containers (although they can be
used when moving containers as well):

 - `--no-start` to keep the moved/cloned container on the target node stopped
 - `--no-restart` to keep the moved/cloned container on the source node stopped
 - `--no-network-interfaces` to remove network interfaces from the container's
   config
